The potential for Beast Signer
==============================

Beast Signer is a Fig Hunter game devoted to a particular world. I wanted to 
use this scratchpad as a place fo flesh out an idea for a similar world that 
I'd been inspired to think of. It would be a candidate world for a Pokemon-type 
collectible game.

In a bizarre future, humanity has begun to produce more and more autonomous 
machines with more and more power on their own; they attend to and serve all 
sorts of economic interests. The heaviest investors are corporate, displacing 
large human populations, as nontechnical jobs become dominated by automated 
processors. Resource wars, at first fought politically, become real battles as 
corporations develop automated militias to secure their resource rights, and 
governments ultimately throw off their corruption and fight for e.g. energy 
independence.

The Transnational Unified Technology Syndicate (TUTS, or just the Syndicate) 
emerges as a confederation of multinational technical corporations, and forms a 
major alliance with OPEC. TUTS dominates US politics, but is soundly rejected 
by the EU countries, which have used their shiny robot slaves to build a more 
liberal and socialist utopia, led principally by a national coalition 
spearheaded by Norway and Iceland. 

Their major scientific institutions, fighting against the political walls, 
unite together on The Grid, an ultrahigh-bandwidth information superstructure 
and processing system; TUTS backs this as an entertainment network, to keep 
(for example) the US population from demanding a revolution. New understanding 
of consciousness allow ToPS -- total perceptive stimulation -- enabling people 
to be put into waking dreams controlled by computer feedback. At first, the 
dreamcards are the hottest commodity pirated over the Grid, and the Overlay 
Virtualization (OVirt) project grants Grid access in every city as an "overlay" 
atop the mundane matter. If that's not enough, these technologies unify under 
the SIMPLE project, which offers an immersive simulated experience complete 
with physics constraints and world modifications -- the Simplenet. People being 
what they are, the Simplenet is simply known to non-technologists as The Grid 
-- all becomes one. Meanwhile, while we grow our understanding of consciousness, 
non-conscious AI becomes better and better. Grid organisms start to emerge -- a 
fully encapsulated evolutionary process which occasionally must be monitored 
and destroyed. They are originated by scientists in order to "clean up" parts 
of the Grid, and can be "signed" into an individual's control by design. 
Anomalies which cannot be signed do occur, but the Grid is updated to flag them 
as junk data for other Grid organisms to destroy -- a virtual death sentence 
for them.

Above a sleepy populace, political tensions have come to a head. An alliance of 
Asian countries led by China wants more power. The Syndicate wants more power. 
The EU doesn't want to give up any power. Tensions run unmistakably high in the 
Middle East.

The first comes when Grid firewalls become total disconnects, that the allied 
Asian technological infrastructure breaks apart from the allied European one 
and so on. Nobody is happy about this, particularly not the TUT Syndicate, 
which was using the Grid organisms for high-stakes reconnaisannce. They demand 
that the lines be brought open again. Everyone refuses. In just a couple short 
years everyone is in danger.

When war comes, it is sudden and nuclear. The massive repercussions result in a 
nuclear winter -- 10 years where typical land temperatures are ~ 20 C lower or 
so, droughts hit once-fertile farmland, rain covers the Sahara, and people are 
largely wiped out when food supplies dwindle. The faltering of the Grid 
structures leads to both massive anarchy and starvation. But the machines, long 
since self-repairing, collect in force over about 5 years, enough to repair 
those same amenities, including The Grid, which actually becomes somewhat 
easier without so many people to protect and so much vegetation threatening to 
take over. Some cities, like Oslo and Munich, become purely mechanical. 

Our story begins somewhere in the southwestern US -- perhaps California -- with 
bands of survivors. I imagine that the Syndicate has quite possibly reformed -- 
that is, that they would have bases in the Rocky Mountains sufficient to weather 
a nuclear winter. Due to ozone depletion fears, they're also surely constructing 
broad glass geodesic domes over exposed structures, and trying to spend time 
underground. I can also imagine that the Grid contacts are good enough that 
there are several populations networking back up again through it. But there 
will be uncontrolled evolution of grid organisms 

