RPGs and Stories

For a long time, it seemed absolutely obvious to me that roleplaying games are stories. What else could they be? It didn't matter whether it was a linear computer RPG like Final Fantasy 7 or a totally freeform interpersonal RPG like Amber: the goal was to somehow tell a story. Even the White Wolf system called the GM a "storyteller." But I'm less sure today. They certainly /feel/ different. When I played D&D, I didn't really feel like the recipient of a story. Since I'm now trying to write my own stories, I thought I would dump some ideas publicly on the matter.

<b>Immersiveness</b>
Immersion is the quality of totally losing awareness of your self as a media-consumer, as you are consuming the media you're involved in. It is the quality where you suddenly find yourself several hundred pages later, saying "*how* late is it now?" It isn't limited to media consumption: as I write this, or as I program, I also find myself immersed in the creative act. Immersion is one of the core fundamental addictive qualities for both stories and games. Immersion-breaking is not always a bad thing, particularly at chapter boundaries: not all good things have to be addictive in their goodness. 

Novels have a much easier time of immersion than RPGs. A pen-and-paper RPG contains all sorts of dead time when your character is not a part of the action, or when you are looking to see "hey, do I have that power? No? Okay, I'll roll for such-and-so." The one time I played Amber, it broke immersion in a totally different way: the GM did not have an assembled party with a single-minded goal, and we were kind of left to fend for ourselves, mostly talking to each other in-character without anything getting done. I have since heard reports of other, longer-term Amber games which also veered off the course of immersion. I'm not surprised. Amber is nice because it has no rules, but because it is open-ended, it follows the law of entropy that Ira Glass so aptly phrased: "All art is trying to be crap. 

	"One thing that you should know is that all [artistic] production is trying to be crap. Basically, it's like the laws of entropy -- you know, that thing where all the energy of the universe is dissipating, and all the atoms are getting lower and lower in energy? Well, basically, everything that you put on tape, from the moment you put it on tape,  it's trying to be really bad. It's trying to be unstructured, it's trying to be pointless, it's trying to be boring, it's trying to be digressive -- much like these sentences that I'm saying right here. And pretty much, you have to prop it up aggressively at every stage of the way, if it's going to be any good." 

On the other hand, 

First off, I think that good stories are trying to be good RPGs. What I mean is, your reader should get swept up in the action; a good story is /immersive/ in the sense that a good RPG is immersive. And the reason that I had this backwards is also simple: it is much harder for an RPG to have that immersive quality. 

Two similar games, made by the same company in the same universe (one the sequel of the other) come to mind: Morrowind and Oblivion. For me, Morrowind was terribly immersive, and I played through it several separate times, completing side-quests like a machine. Its sequel, Oblivion, had graphics ten times more beautiful, citizens who would really go home to sleep, food in the bars, et cetera. But there was something ineffable missing from Oblivion: it never immersed me. I'll tell you what happened: I would run around chasing barely-existent mudcrabs, spending tons of time trying to level up a little. Eventually I was just save-reloading in the colloseum as I placed bets, to make a little cash. It was all tedious immersion-breaking shit: a real chore. The chore in Morrowind was "steal enough ebony from the Caldera Ebony Mine to get enough money that you can ditch this town and move on." Loaded to 100% with the heaviest material in the game, every step was slow and painful, but with the payoff, I could buy training, and thus levels, from talented instructors across the game world. Eventually, I could taunt heavily-armored religious zealots called Ordinators into attacking me, at which point I would do something utterly cruel like paralyze them and then use an amulet to freeze them to death. Since they drew their sword first, this was totally legal and acceptable within the game. And then I would take their expensive armor and sell it: a lucrative business. If there was business in Oblivion, I never found it. I was too busy trying to get to level five, in the hopes that maybe /this/ level the bandits wouldn't clobber me completely in three strikes. (It never worked. They leveled up alongside you.)

I can think of a couple novels which broke immersion. Perhaps the most flagrant is one that wasn't trying to be a coherent story: I ultimately skipped most of the prophetic and historical works in the Old Testament of the Bible as boring crap, getting between me and my Ecclesiastes. A better example is Foucault's Pendulum, where the flashback-in-a-flashback-in-a-flashback methodology started getting so tedious that I seriously at one point said, "listen, I'm just going to skip past the part where this guy travelled to Brazil, and see if I missed anything." I only missed a little: the guy made a girlfriend who became relevant to the later plot. Even Goodkind's /Wizard's First Rule/, which I think started way too slowly and ended way too fast, was quite immersive in the telling. Non-reality TV would be immersive too, if it weren't for all the damn ads. (Reality TV might as well, if you removed with the ads the mini-cliffhangers they try to build around every advertisement. Have some class, people.)

I can tolerate tedium up to a good margin without losing immersiveness, but when it's lost, it's all at once. 