Unlike this particular site, I will state my beliefs explicitly and clearly, so that there is no ambiguity: I am a religious atheist. What this means is, I have many beliefs which can only be described as religious beliefs, but none of them are oriented towards a supernatural realm that is not here and now, not with us all. Atheism means a rejection of everything of that kind: ghosts, gods, telepathy, magic, souls and spirits animating the inanimate world. It does /not/ mean a rejection of transcendence or transcendent principles, or a rejection of morality or truth or beauty or life: indeed, in my religious life I certainly affirm such things. But I am committed to the idea that morality is something which we construct and participate in, that its transcendence is given by the transcendence of conscious aims and desires and hopes and fears. It is in some ways a nuanced position, but I believe that at its core there is a remarkable simplicity to the entire ensemble of beliefs. 

With this much stated, I can now turn to what I would consider the problems of theism in general, the reasons why I am not a theist. What questions does the word "God" putatively answer, that we might read on this site that "One word explains our goals, and that is the Truth," and so on? What answers are we seeking to find a true answer to?

The first question is perhaps most broadly stated this way: "Why is there anything at all? In other words, why is there something, as opposed to nothing?" This was a puzzle studied in particular by the Christian scholar Thomas Aquinas, but the generic Abrahamic answer is, "because God made it that way." Theism provides God as a supernatural answer to the question.

I would say that this is a mistake. I do agree that there may well be an answer -- even a cause-related answer -- to this sort of question, but I would then leave God as an open question, rather than an answer to this statement. There are a couple of popular atheist criticisms to be stated here. 

First, I think many modern atheists would say that they're not sure that the question makes sense -- that our intuitions about nothing can extend to this point without breaking. I think Aquinas' work touches on this most strongly. If we want to answer this question, we must be very careful that God does /not/ exist, that God is /not/ any kind of thing whatsoever, because if God is part of the "anything", then we are answering our original question of "Why is there something rather than nothing?" with the question "Well, because there is Something."