
What is virtue? My own answer comes in the keeping of five self-commitments, but it is hard to explain just how I think they fit together, or why I think all of them are necessary. So I wanted to provide this set of character-studies, to explain how virtue fixes the real problems of the human condition.

We start with a woman in her bed; her boyfriend has hurt her again, and she is sobbing in pain. This sort of emotional pain, if you've never felt it, bites back with a bitter thrust, numbing everything else but itself. Just in this vision, it is hard to say what the boy did, or how it can be fixed. But all of us, standing outside this picture, wish to fix it, and we might even dare to believe that it can indeed be fixed. Her circumstance can most probably be changed; and she has the power to do so. We can see the problem: that she is not in a situation which allows her to have a deep and abiding love of her own life. Even without seeing the rest of it, we understand the goal and the struggle: the goal is to reclaim her love for her life, and she must find a way to make that life a better place, worthier for her love.

That is the first commitment: the commitment to love.

While this is noble, it cannot be enough. Our next consideration is a man who loves his dreams and lives in them; his rich fantasy worlds provide and escape from his day-to-day life. Perhaps he simply watches television all day, or perhaps he has delusions of grandeur and believes that everyone loves him, or perhaps he takes mind-altering drugs to escape the pain of the rest of his life. All of these share the same theme: they pursue a greater love of life, but they are not virtuous, because, we would say, they are "unreal" in some sense or another. I would not say that fantasies are totally without value: but they are no substitute for truth. What this man needs is to be honest with himself, to see his world honestly. There is no virtue in finding love in a dishonest view of the world. I do not strictly commit to a method by which the world can be seen honestly; but I commit to the goal of seeing it that way.

This is the second commitment: the commitment to honesty.

Even so, there are many women who are today stuck at home, or stuck in a waitressing job with dreams unrealized. They might have many friends, and they might enjoy their work, and they might be seeing the world honestly: but there is something missing. They are not, properly speaking, heroines, as long as they keep to their dead-end job. We can certainly find love in security and stability, but we must characterize the exact moment when it "goes too far" and becomes unheroic. I think it's this: that she must be ambitious, and that it must be an ambition-in-action. If she is an aspiring actress, then her drudgery work cannot distract her from her study of acting and her attempt to find a new role in her dream job. If she has a novel plot churning in the back of her head, she must dare to put it to paper as it comes out, and get it published. Security and stability are okay, so long as they don't crush these ambitions.

This is the third commitment: the commitment to ambition.

Still we are missing something. Many's the man whose ambitions, fulfilled, have brought him to command armies or lead countries. Some are heroes and some are villains. The unresolved question deals with other people. We see some who are genocidal and authoritarian; others defeat discrimination and save the starving. He must share with others the gifts he's been given. The joy and success and love and truth that he has found must also be directed outward, that other conscious beings may find it as well. A general principle of charity separates the modern hero from the villain.

This is the fourth commitment: the commitment to charity.

Finally, we imagine one with hopes, dreams, and ambitions, which they act on: not in fantasy but reality, raising those around them up with them. This is certainly a grand story: but to be a truly enduring one, there is something left remaining: what might be called "moral resolution." There is something quite intangible missing from our heroes and heroines. It involves dignity, but also modesty. The self disappears in the same breath as it is found; one sees the common character of humanity in all; one finds the transcendent within the virtuous life. There is a down-to-earth meekness which comes from the feeling of cosmic closure: a respect for just how little we are in the grand scheme of things, a reflection on the futures to come and the past which has come before. I call this characteristic "humility." Our heroes cannot be vain and our heroines cannot be arrogant; in the end, greed and self-centeredness must, too, fall away. Virtue consists not simply in beating back the struggle, but in transcending it, and fulfilling it.  

This is the final commitment, the commitment to humility.

Thus we see five facets of those that we would label as virtuous: Love, Honesty, Ambition, Charity, and Humility. Each one is an incredibly large category of action: but this is intentional, and it arises because the world is complicated and subtle. For example, to regard "honesty" as simply a commitment "to tell the exact truth to all people at all times" is hopelessly naive. We know that there are some situations where the "right thing" requires lying, or at least not telling the truth: they range from casual politeness (i.e. we don't tell fat people that they are fat), to hiding an oppressed person from their pursuing oppressor. Our commitments, instead, involve seeing the world honestly and sharing that gift with others, sharing the gifts of freedom and love with the oppressed one, and trying to teach the oppressor of charity and kindness.
