In 1912, Rev. William Evans published a work on the Great Doctrines of the Bible. It is not so often that I get to read works from a century ago -- a wholly different culture -- and evaluate them with modern eyes. I try to indulge whenever I can.

He begins by asserting the existence of God, as opposed to atheism. And his very first argument is something that my modern eyes find peculiar:

	"Man everywhere believes in the existence of a supreme Being or Beings to whom he is morally responsible and to whom propitiation needs to be made. ... Concerning so-called atheists in Christian lands: it may be questioned if there are really any such beings. ...This universal belief comes from within man. All the evidence points to the conclusive fact that this universal faith in the existence of God is innate in man, and comes from rational intuition.

	"...The fact that all men everywhere believe in the existence of a supreme Being or beings to whom they are morally responsible, is a strong argument in favor of its truth. So universal an effect must have a cause as universal, otherwise we have an effect without any assignable cause. Certain is it that this argument makes the burden of proof to rest upon those who deny the existence of God."

I think this is absolutely fascinating. I find it extremely hard to think up a modern theologian who would start with this argument. The argument is peculiar at a meta-level: it immediately announces that it is rebuking skeptics, but it insists that it's skeptical of the existence of such skeptics. It appeals to the universality of belief, but professionals would today pretty universally show distaste to the argument. 

It does raise an interesting question: why do we have intuitions that draw us towards God? But natural theology only draws it so far: it states that the cause must be universal across human nature, but then doesn't say much more. I think this is one of the reasons that we can't take it seriously anymore: we know today, with the unlocking of the genetic code, that there are many things which have universal-across-humanity effects, but which do not come directly from God himself. It's not just genetics, but also social behaviours, games, music, narratives of heroes and disasters, language, lying, and other such things.

The question is all the more interesting because the exact intuitions that draw one towards God are actually rather ambiguous, when you really think about them. When we wrong someone, we feel guilty: and our guilt is directed /towards them/. But when we feel guilty in private, I think the feeling is altogether different. I don't think people feel a singular moral responsibility to God in any direct sense