I was talking with my cousin Marjolein the other day, and we started talking 
about my brief flirtation with Christian fundamentalism in high school, when I 
spent a bunch of free time reading and researching the Bible and Christian 
apologetics. I of course am nowhere near this position today. But we started to 
talk about Genesis at one point in the conversation, and I thought I would try 
to expand upon that discussion here, in a note.

Genesis is the first book of the /torat moshe/ -- the teachings of Moses. It's 
probably the most-read book of the Bible, presumably because Christians keep 
starting with the first book and never managing to get through Leviticus. The 
old testament can, indeed, get tedious at times: I will not dispute this! As 
part of the Torah, it contains a bunch of different stories which, at some 
later time, were collected and arranged together, in a slapdash order. Genesis 
specifically is devoted to those stories which come before the story of Moses,
whose journey begins the Book of Exodus. Most of the stories have some sort of 
/moral homily/ to them. If there was something that was most stupid about my 
biblical literalism, it was that I didn't at the time understand that these 
stories were about positively human lessons.

One of the stories, which I will not specifically highlight further, is the 
/genealogy of the world/, which has been broken up and scattered across the 
narrative. It is used here for the same reason that I think it was probably
invented for: to organize the stories that the Levite clan had been collecting. 
The goal was to integrate several different stories, like the tower of Babel or 
Abraham and Isaac, into some sort of clear overall mythology. The Torah as a 
whole is perhaps best viewed in this light. In any case, when you see a 
genealogy, remember that these are a sort of organizational detail to the 
Genesis narrative.

Our first story is the most read: the first creation story, Genesis 1:1 - 2:4. 
The fact that it actually ends in the middle of Genesis 2:4 tells you something 
very interesting about the chapter/verse numbering scheme: it came much, much 
later than the Torah, when Christians wanted a scheme for further organizing 
the books in time of reference. This story also reveals a sort of ancient 
Hebrew cosmology: The universe is a sort of cylinder with three layers: land, 
then sea, then heaven, where God's wind lives. Within the sea, there is a dome 
called the "sky", which separates the blue waters above from the blue waters 
beneath; God has lifted some of the earth up and pushed some of the water 
below, so as to make dry land appear within the dome of our experience. The
lightening and darkening of the sky is presented as primary, with the Sun 
and Moon coming afterwards, on the fourth day. This is presumably because you 
can often see the Moon faintly while the sky is still blue. 

The stance I am taking above -- that Genesis is about concrete lessons -- is 
antithetical to some other ones. For example, I have heard some people profess 
that "let there be light" is a casual Hebrew description of the Big Bang, and 
thus that we are poetically describing the world of science. I think that this 
viewpoint is fundamentally mistaken. First off, it doesn't work -- this 
narrative explicitly says that water, dry land, the sky, and plants all came 
before the Sun existed. Second, it misses the point -- the ancient Hebrews were 
/not/ trying to predict modern science when they wrote Genesis, and the modern 
scientific picture, with its small humans in a larger-than-we-can-see universe, 
would not have been a good basis for the moral lessons which this narrative is
trying to teach.

After plants, the Sun, and animals come around, God summons a creature, made in 
His image, knowing right and wrong, to dominate over the land and the animals:
a creature blessed to multiply across the entire planet, and eat its creatures. 
We culminate with the establishment and meaning of the Sabbath, the weekly 
Hebrew ritual of rest: its observation is wonderment that the universe exists 
at all in the first place, and to marvel at our special place in it.

The second story of Genesis is, well, the second creation story, Genesis
2:4 - 2:24. It appears even though it contradicts explicitly the first story 
in a bunch of the details: God makes man, then Eden, then the plants, then the 
animals, and then woman. Here our dominion over the animals is primary, because 
the ultimate purpose of all of those animals was to be our companions. We also 
see the beginning of God's limitations in Genesis: God doesn't get the formula 
right in his first go, and has to invoke some sympathetic magic to finally 
create the perfect companion. 

The third story in Genesis is a good favorite, even though it contains a crafty talking snake. Here's the rub: we are created, in some sense, without any real 
wisdom, moral or otherwise. So the snake, who is able to figure such things 
out, asks a curious question: "can you eat from every tree?" and Eve responds, 
"no, there's one tree in the middle that we can't eat from. God, in essence, 
told us that it was poison." And the snake says, "no, it's wisdom -- how could 
wisdom be poisonous?". 

Taking the fruit, we lose our innocence and gain wisdom in its place. Symbolic 
of our newfound wisdom, we wear clothes -- in other words, /privacy/ is viewed 
as the ultimate symbol of wise thought. But God finds out, and hands out some 
punishments, including painful childbirth, and that we will have to toil for 
our food. But -- this is not the reason that we are exiled from Eden.

Turn to Genesis 3:22, and you'll see that the /reason/ we were kicked out of 
Eden was because /God was worried/. That's the brilliant part of this story:
/we surprised God/ with our actions and potential. God was worried that we 
would become /immortal/ and thus become Gods ourselves. 

The next story is the story of Cain and Abel, who are presented as brothers. 
Here, you see that Cain symbolizes the agrarian farmer, while Abel symbolizes 
the herdsman -- which was the traditional Hebrew role. When they offered to 
God, God liked the meat more, which made Cain bitter and jealous. Despite a 
warning from God that he must master his anger, Cain kills Abel. There are a 
bunch of competing lessons in this narrative: first, there is an intrinsic 
distrust between the Hebrew herdsman and farmers -- e.g. the Egyptians. Second, 
there is an explanation that the enmity is ultimately religious: people kill 
other people, even their brothers, for the favor of God. There is a lesson to 
the effect of, "this is why farmers have to travel from field to field."

The story of Cain ends with the story of his descendants, who live East of 
the fertile crescent. More specifically, it focuses on a mean tribe, the 
tribe of Lamech: Some live in tents, some are musicians, and some are 
metalworkers. Notice that this story actually has no historical point, as 
if Genesis were a coherent history, the Flood would have rendered any 
discussion of Caine's descendants moot. But presumably, at one point there was
a tribe of Lamech which existed in the mountains of Iran, which had those 
distinct groups: musicians, tradesmen, and farmers, and they were so violent 
that they would kill you for so much as smacking them upside the head. 

The ancestry begins, tracing Seth to Noah. 