The Principle of Balance.

> My biggest fear in life is that the universe works:
> I guess, to be blessed, we have to be cursed first.
> ~ Chronic Future ~

> Unleash that flame, again and again
> Like passion and pain: hand-in-hand with each other.
> ~ Lo-fidelity Allstars ~

In the spring of 2010 I decided to do some push-ups. I didn't really have any strong motivation inspiring me forth, but I remembered them from my childhood as something I dreaded, and I wanted to prove to myself that I was merely hallucinating. I went down, but I found it incredibly difficult to return up even once. I decided to instead do several push-ups against a stairwell, so that I wouldn't have to lift all of my weight: this was much more tractable.

The day after, many muscles in my upper body felt absolutely wretched. What had happened was simple enough: I stopped exercising and my muscles degraded and atrophied. So, the next day, my entire upper body was the subject of a major, muscle-wide ache, focused primarily on my pectorals and secondarily on my triceps. These simple effects came from a simple cause: as everyone knows, you have to exercise to build your muscle-mass: a fact so aptly summarized in the aphorism, "no pain, no gain."

This statement, while rather simple and obvious, is not at all intuitive. Why doesn't our body work like a ratchet, turning forwards but not backwards? Why can atrophy happen? And why would it be *needed* -- why don't our bodies simply build an ideal amount of muscle-mass in the first place?

- Answer ^ : probably it is hard for a physical body to /actually maintain/ its appendages. 



A general principle of life: reward only comes with risk, passion only comes with pain, and you will miss many good things if you let the opportunities slide past due to fear. Heroes and heroines are doers, not worrywarts: and when they fail, they fail gloriously. So: fail gloriously, yourself. Go up to a guy and tell him that you think he's cute. See what comes of it. If he says "actually I'm gay and have a boyfriend -- here he comes right now!" -- then just laugh it off.