
There is one position in the abortion rights debate which deserves special comment: the sanctity of life position. It is perhaps better defined by the situations which have caused it to be outraged, rather than any particular principle. Sanctity-of-life proponents have been offended at the termination of those in a persistent vegetative state, the potential for certain sorts of birth control to not let an incipient human implant into its mother's womb, and any abortion thereafter in any term of pregnancy. We can also identify some things that sanctity-of-life proponents don't uniformly find troubling, like the eating of meat and the treatment of livestock, medical triage, capital punishment for violent crimes, some sorts of war, and divinely-ordained slaughter.

To several pro-choicers, then, this seems inconsistent. How does one stay comfortable with the Bible's descriptions of genocides of the sinful, while still maintaining that if you remove someone in a persistent vegetative state from life support, you commit murder? There's some sort of thematic discrepancy, surely?

I think sanctity-of-life proponents understand this potential discrepancy, and rise to the challenge. And so we have a common formulation in the "sanctity of life": life has a certain intrinsic value. This value is very high -- higher than most other values combined. 

The value of life might not be totally insuperable. But, there are many things which it is greater than: you can't trade life for wealth, freedom, religious enlightenment, personal integrity, a right to personal bodily autonomy, and so forth. We might perhaps trade life for /even more/ life, depending on the relative amounts. Also, people might violate their life's own sanctity, as in the violent offenders who are now on death row -- they used life to pervert life's beauty the same way that someone who libels uses speech to pervert the value of free speech. And finally, there may be some rare values, especially divine values, which are more important than life -- they are /worth dying for/, in that sense. 

 According to this position, life is /so valuable/ that it becomes a threshold for a higher level of value than worldly concerns. In other words, it doesn't matter if someone is old and infirm or young and healthy: their lives have approximately the same value: one human life. The position insistently *refuses* to accept any sort of quality: by design, sanctity of life prohibits the killing of a hundred people in persistent vegetative states, even if it would free up the medical resources needed to save fifty people who would have a higher-quality life ahead of them. I say this because it is /life/ which has sanctity, and not the /quality/ of that life per se; and the sanctity of life always overrides those quality concerns.

Sanctity of life has an important core truth to it, when we consider that all of the other qualities which we value depend on life in the first place: those who never lived will have no wealth, religious enlightenment, personal dignity, or bodily autonomy. The sanctity-of-life proponent may, of course, believe in a life everlasting in which such things /are/ realized, but that's just the point: when we conceive of these values, we are apparently imagining a sort of life.

But where someone else might believe that it's those other qualities which make life valuable, the sanctity-of-life proponent is committed to the idea that it's the life itself which bears most of the value. 

It's worth arguing this point slightly more rigorously. Sanctity-of-life proponents are generally against a contraception method if it /might/ be abortifacient -- that is, if an accidentally-fertilized embryo from a sex act, which would normally implant in the womb, is unable to because of the contraception. They are also opposed to embryonic stem-cell cultivation and termination of people in persistent vegetative states, even if it happens simply by removing their life support and letting them die. Of all of these, the qualities that I've been discussing -- wealth, religious experience, and so on -- are only clearly relevant to the first and the third, and not to the second (the embryos used will die unless, say, we were to forcibly implant them into women). Even in the first case, these will only be possessed by the embryo at a later date, if the remaining course of pregnancy succeeds; and in the third case, these qualities are only present to the person in the past tense -- things that they had and might still have, but will never be able to experience again. This criss-crossing classification exhausts all of our possibilities: we cannot appeal to potentials or to past acheivements in describing the common ground. Simply put, the common ground is biological life, as opposed to biological death. 

Now that we know what sanctity-of-life /is/, I'm going to deal with the problems that it faces. I don't think these are necessarily insuperable, but I believe that they're serious problems that a sanctity-of-lifer needs to address -- and so few of them do. 

1. What life, and why?
Perhaps the first paradox in the sanctity of life is the tremendous rarity of veganism among sanctity-of-lifers. 

This is worth a tremendous pause, because it has deep implications. If normal /animal/ life is not worth living -- or at least, if a cow's life is worth less in living than the steaks and happy meals it can provide -- then it has to be a distinctively /human/ life that is elevated and worth living.

I said above that, by design, sanctity-of-life refuses to acknowledge the quality of a life as anything morally relevant. And here is the paradox: without veganism, the very thing which sanctity-of-life desired to avoid -- that you can't judge between biological lives -- is being recklessly abandoned: zoologically, at least, you *can* judge between lives. If two embryos look very similar, including sharing 95.7% of their genes[1], but the remaining 4.3% of those genes make this mammal a cow instead of a human, then its sanctity of life suddenly drops precipitously. Of course, it couldn't be DNA similarity alone that grants the sanctity of life, because humans lacking a chromosome or having an extra one will still have the sanctity of life, despite the DNA difference. But it's interesting that the difference between an embryo worth saving indefinitely and an embryo worth saving only until it becomes dinner can be so small.

I've already addressed a sanctity-of-life argument here, but I should perhaps reframe it properly. The sanctity-of-life proponents that I have met are generally tempted to refer to the *potential* of the human embryo to become a full-grown human with a high-quality life. But again, we can't appeal to any properties which the person in a persistent vegetative state doesn't have -- and the potential for a later high-quality life is precisely this sort of property.  We're trying to form a criterion which includes the normal human adult, the human being in a persistent vegetative state, the fertilized human embryo both on a petri dish and in the fallopian tubes, but not the grown cow or the cow embryo. So, we cannot anchor the value of the human life in the hopes and ambitions and experiences that the embryo might one day obtain. We know that, since vegetative humans still have a claimed right to life, those hopes, ambitions, and future experiences don't make up the right to life.

There is a better answer, although I'm not sure how much better it actually is: for their part, several sanctity-of-lifers believe in an immortal soul which animates the body of an incipient human from conception; and it is this, they say, that gives that entity its rights and sanctity. I think this is more trouble than it's worth. If the soul is immortal, and death is just a biological phenomenon, then death does not offend "life" in this sense: it perhaps frustrates that soul's desires and ambitions in the present, but, then, so does being stuck in a body that's locked in a persistent vegetative state. Since biological death cannot truly harm the soul, we'd thus risk invalidating the core premise: that biological life is not just important, but /the most important/. If it's biological life that has sanctity, it's no good to try to explain it away with a metaphysical life, unless you try to correlate the two.

A further problem arises for the soul-theory out of animal cruelty: most sanctity-of-life proponents wouldn't feel very comfortable speaking to a man who, for example, electrocuted or burned animals just to hear their tortured squeals. Perhaps the cow is worth more as steaks than as a living cow, but its life and its experiences of pleasure and pain are clearly an order of magnitude more than human whimsy and depravity. And atop all of these, we have the fundamental uncertainty of religious beliefs: the question "what if you're wrong?" permeates any theory of what happens to the soul after we die. It seems odd to say that the question of whether it's right to allow abortion turns on, as it were, a leap of faith.

Perhaps sanctity-of-lifers should just take me at face value. "Okay," they might say, "cows are alive and thus their lives are sanctified. I'm going to join PETA and become a vegan. Isn't my stance coherent now?" But even if we admitted to a certain veganism, it's not clear why plants, which are also living things, would be exceptional. The generic theme here is the contrast between a sanctity-of-lifer's apparently biologically-generous claim and a modern person's human-chauvinism. Why are we allowed to kill cows and cabbages to prolong our own lives? It cannot be a naive tallying of lives, because, for example, I know I've been directly responsible for the intentional and chosen death of more than one lobster. Even if we only eat dead things, presumably millions of bacteria will be crushed under our heels every day.

This is, thus, a difficult question that the sanctity-of-lifer needs to address. Because the moment that you start talking about non-biological qualities, it seems like you either plunge into metaphysics or cede that some humans who lack those qualities are leading lives that aren't worth living. The sanctity-of-lifer is left with the question /what makes us special?/ and yet needs to address it without pointing to any particular quality of human life.

2. What of biology?
We might somehow resolve the above, and admit a non-qualitative justified chauvinism for human lives above animal lives. Perhaps I'm simply not inventive enough to see one. But if we're not careful about how we build this, part of the objection will still remain in a different form, stemming from a modern biological perspective of the world.

Now, I don't want to get into an extended debate on Darwinism, because it's the general perspective of evolution, and not the particulars, that concern me -- and such a perspective is valid even if Darwin is wrong.

The basic fact, independent of evolution, is this: living things kill other living things, to eat them and grow and thrive; and they are then killed by various circumstances in order for other life to live. 

If animal lives still have a moral value, albeit less than our non-qualitative human lives, then life is in fact the grossest of tragedies: life requires death, and for a creature to act morally it must first begin by acting immorally, to be granted the privilege of life, which is required for moral action in the first place. 

Of course, the sanctity-of-life proponent might object, "well, yes. It's all very tragic. Sorry that the world is such an unbeautiful place." The problem is not a logical contradiction. 

But there's a huge problem nonetheless: we don't think of cows as committing mass slaughter of grass, or lions as being a standing outrage against all moral worth. Blue-footed boobies peck the brains out of their siblings in order to have more resources and a better chance at life. They might not understand the moral implications of their actions, but surely we do: and so, surely we should be keeping them from pecking each others' brains out, and so forth.

If non-human life has any significant value at all, then our overall human project of taming nature has a significant unexplored moral dimension: that of trying to tame the wilds so that they no longer act according to this evolutionary life-requires-death perspective. And I think we can generally agree that this isn't really a long-term project that anybody was planning on, even in the smaller term, in the sanctity-of-life field. Sanctity-of-life proponents don't habitually seek out zoos and evaluate the moral conditions that their animals are kept in. It's just not apparently relevant to the sanctity-of-life position.

This is the biological analogue of the first objection we saw last section: that sanctity-of-lifers aren't vegan. What do we make of the responses that we considered above? The strongest one that I considered endowed the fertilized embryo and the vegetative state alike with an immortal soul which was the seat of moral value. 

For all of its other objections, we can now see that it is also unacceptable to modern biology. Modern biology is stuck with the fact that, like it or not, we're /mammals/. Even more specifically, we're /primates/. Whatever else you're going to do with our species, our difference from the animal kingdom is one of levels, not one of fundamental structure: we have more of certain qualities than they do, not just the presence of some thing which other mammals all consistently don't have. For example, we have a mastery of language unique among the animal kingdom: but of course we know that this is a higher level about many common communicative procedures among animals. They simply aren't at the point where their skills in traversing the physical world get co-opted to look back upon their own mental lives. But a deer still flashes its tail to communicate to its group that they must all run from danger, and birds still sing their spring songs in the trees.

While ceding the point in both this section and the last section is onerous, the sanctity-of-lifer has another counter-intuitive option. They could, at this point, say "listen: for animals, we're just going to grant the quality-of-life case. It has nothing to do, after all, with those basic issues that we were dealing with before -- vegetative states, contraception, and stem cells." To be more blunt, because animals don't have a sanctity-of-life, the quality-concerns become again predominant; but because humans *do* have a sanctity-of-life, the quality-concerns are simply negligible.

Now that we've seen the biological problem with souls, we can see that this answers these specific objections, but it does not answer the viewpoint as a whole. If the value of the lives of all other species are dominated by quality-concerns, then biology would suspect that the value of our lives are also dominated by quality-concerns -- just of a different magnitude. If we're missing something here, then all of biology is fundamentally misguided.

Time
Several authors have used time in the way I'm about to use time, and it's a bit of a modern poetic idiom. My favorite comes in Roger Zelazny's Amber novel, /The Guns of Avalon/:

"Let's have another glass of wine."
"It'll go to my head."
"Good." I poured them.
"We are all going to die," she said.
"Eventually."
"I mean here, soon, fighting this thing."
"Why do you say that?"
"It's too strong."
"Then why stick around?"
"I've no place else to go."

In this typical inversion, someone panics about an imminent mortal threat of some sort or another -- but the humor comes from the fact that we are all, by our very natures, under an eventual mortal threat. It's the "I've no place else to go"-ness of the present that forces us to stick around, and which makes the imminent threat seem more toxic than the eventual one. This particular exchange is also especially meaningful because the man who says "Eventually" -- Corwin -- is ageless and a relatively rapid healer, practically immortal by human standards. 

Now, we must apply this inversion to sanctity-of-life, I feel, because there are two different things that we could mean. Either we're trying to maximize the number of human lives over all time, or else we're trying desperately to maximize the number of human lives in the here-and-now. 

Now, the here-and-now version is intrinsically much easier to manage. 

Triage and Reproduction
The next substantial objection is one of pragmatics, rather than the sort of half-theoretical discussion above. However, it presents a slippery slope and positively dares the sanctity-of-life position to slide down it. And it begins with an exceedingly simple question: If you're treating patients on a battlefield, where there aren't enough resources to treat everyone, how do you allocate your treatment? 

The sanctity-of-life approach says that, if you are choosing between two approaches which both save N human lives, then (and /only/ then) do you evaluate the quality that they will live with. Everything other than N is of second concern: you must save as many lives as possible, because lives are so much of a higher-order goal than other outcomes.

I should clarify that we don't need to take this to any sort of pathological extreme -- for example, imagining a wartime hospital full of easy-to-care-for vegetative states. Those would lead us back into theoretical problems, and they can be mostly overcome with some finesse. I don't care about those so much, because the general pragmatic case is more disturbing.

The key problem here is the fact that you can usually save more lives in a worse way: you can, as it were, only stitch half or three quarters of a wound -- not enough to solve the deeper problem, but enough to perhaps, when saving a little time over all the soldiers, save a couple more lives in the end. Whenever this decision must be made, then, sanctity-of-life says that you should favor worse medical care in the here-and-now for the living, so that there will be fewer dead in the here-and-now.

This gets even more clear when we think in terms of souls that are present in humans from fertilization: modern biology would detest 

There is a useful solution, but it also doesn't fit with modern biology. 


The rest of us can of course 

Thus, we must again take refuge in the fact that humans have certain qualities which make them special. The alternative borders on the disturbing 


Is it some sort of tragedy, then

3. What of the fourth dimension?
As the Ecclesiaster put it, there's a day to live and a day to die: looked at four-dimensionally, with a God's-eye-view, everything dies eventually. 


, it's important that we get a firm idea of what's meant by life, or the sanctity of 

What is a sanctity-of-life position? We 

[1] http://genomebiology.com/2009/10/4/R42