
The Trinity: A Deep Analysis.

For those who are not Christians, the Trinity is perhaps the oddest belief in Christianity. Despite all attempts of ancient sects to rebuke it, modern Christianity generally holds that their singular monotheistic God comes out in three totally seperate beings or persons with divine essence, that it fills three roles in your life. Modern Christians will identify these roles very differently based on their sects, but they have common names: there is the Father, who created the universe and stands authoritative over all; there is the Son, which bridges a gap between humanity and divinity; and there is the Spirit, which provides the beauty that we can see in everything. 

To give an idea of how non-Christians see this, we might look to Islam. Islam was in many respects a revision of Christian thought, and the Trinity was one of the core tenets to go. It was thought that prophets could themselves reconcile humanity and divinity: thus the Son was not God -- and that God did not create the Universe in an instant, but rather /creates every instant/ -- thus the transcendent authority was also responsible for all beauty, making the Father and the Spirit into the exact same concept. Thus, Muslims viewed the Trinity as both unnecessary and unwise; and while Jesus is a prophet in Muslim teachings, Jesus is not an incarnation of God, as he is in Christianity.

Some modern Christians, especially in Unitarian and Charismatic sects, are again de-emphasizing the Trinity as some sort of outmoded Catholic relic. I hope to convince you that they're wrong, and that the Trinity is endemic to Christianity itself: the plain-stated paradoxes of the Trinity are actually deep-seated paradoxes within Christianity, and they make it hard to accept any sort of Christianity. To be a bit more specific, the three faces of God in the Trinity are actually deeply different conceptual underpinnings of monotheism in general, and they are all contrary to each other in spirit. Christianity is trying to mix these three, but it does not offer a gestalt shift in order to do so, except to rely on "mystery" while saying that all three are equally valid.

Let's begin. We'll start with these individual theists and see what sorts of conceptualizations they have for God.

~ Armstrong and Hopkins ~

When modern theist Karen Armstrong was on BBC Radio 4, she summarized her entire position in a couple of eloquent, simple lines, which she aligned with ancient theology: "God is not a fact," she said. Having your attention, she continued on: "they [ancient religious folk] did not read their Biblical stories for information about what happened in ancient Palestine, or information about God." Since the natural facts or information (which she calls <em>logos</em>) were separated from the emotional practices (which she calls <em>mythos</em>), she views the identification of God with facts and logos to be a categorical mistake. When we ask what God then holds, we are greeted with this: "...basically all the world religions that I've studied have come to the conclusion that what brings us to enlightenment is laying aside the self -- selfishness, egotism, and self-interest."

There are some paradoxes already -- why doesn't an engagement with natural facts get you 'outside of yourself', as it were, thus fulfilling your mythos? -- but those are not my concern here. What I see expressed here is much deeper. We can connect Armstrong's ideas with a Victorian poet named Gerard Manley Hopkins, who wrote in a poem <i>As Kingfishers Catch Fire</i>:

	As kingfishers catch fire, dragonflies draw flame
	As sounded over rims in roundy wells, stones ring
	Like each tucked string tells, Each hung bell's
	Bow swung finds tongue to fling out broad its name.
	Each mortal thing does one thing and the same:
	Deals out that being indoors each one dwells,
	Selves, cries itself, /myself/ it speaks and spells
	Crying "What I do is me: For that I came."
	
	I say more. The just man justices,
	Keeps grace, that keeps all his goings graces
	Acts in God's eye what in God's eye He is: 
	Christ. For Christ plays in ten thousand places
	Lovely in limbs, and lovely in eyes not His
	To the Father, through the features of men's faces.

In this modern take, the natural human state is likened to that of a bell, which strikes out the chords that lie within it. All things -- stones dropping in wells, strings on instruments, bells ringing -- have this propery of dealing out the being indoors. The ringing of a bell is viewed as /egotism/ and /self-centered expression/. Everything in nature seeks to express the self, from birds chirping to humans wearing the latest in fashion.

But this is not the domain of God: in /Kingfishers/, God is in the smiles on men's faces, and in the justice of their deeds; God is a personal and human practice of sublimating the Self to the Other by keeping graces with your fellow man. The reconciliation of the human with the divine is a continuous process happening in human affairs, driven and guided by humanity itself.

This is the first picture of God that I want to identify in Christian thought.

~ Saint Paul ~

I would say that the single most important historical figure in the creation of Christianity was not Christ at all, but rather Saul of Tarsus, a Jewish tentmaker who persecuted the nascent Christian community until he had a personal revelatory experience and became Saint Paul, writing a large portion of the New Testament in the form of letters to other congregations of Christians. Whether you will agree with me or not on his relative importance to Jesus, I would like to describe the perspective that he comes to God with. 

You see, in his days as a persecuting Jew, Saul had a problem. It was a deep and massive problem which assaulted his theology at its very core. The problem was, God was Infinite and Perfect and other such things, whereas we humans were Finite and Imperfect and so on. How could we ever seek, then, a relationship with God? For Saul of Tarsus, there was an infinite chasm between God and Man. Man was totally alienated from God.

The Jews, of course, had an answer for this: it was rituals, particularly sacrifices, that reconciled Man with God. But for Saul, this wasn't enough. It was potentially idolatrous (1 Cor 10:18-20 and 1 Cor 8:1-8), and it really conflicted with God's perfection: for we begin the sacrifice by trying as imperfect beings to assay God's preferences, and then we find ourselves trying to give to a perfect being -- both unassailable tasks (Romans 11:33-36).

His conversion into St. Paul was sudden and dramatic: he realized that the Christians had an answer. In Christianity, Saul of Tarsus saw the potential for /atonement/. According to Paul, our alienation from God /is/ reconciled by one ultimate sacrifice: that of Jesus the Nazarene. He calls Jesus explicitly such in Ephesians 4:31-5:2 (a fragrant offering to God) and 1 Corinthians 5:6-8. But Paul is most explicit in Romans 3-5, of which I'll restrict myself just to the beginning:

	But now, apart from law, the righteousness of God has been disclosed, and is attested by the law and the prophets, the righteousness of God through faith in Jesus Christ for all who believe. For there is no distinction, since all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God; they are now justified by his grace as a gift, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom God put forward as a sacrifice of atonement by his blood, effective through faith. He did this to show his righteousness, because in his divine forbearance he had passed over the sins previously committed; it was to prove at the present time that he himself is righteous and that he justifies the one who has faith in Jesus. (Romans 3:21-26)

You see, here is the next perspective that I want to outline on God: that God is trying to /call us back to Him/. In Paul's view, God is real and tangible, and through the Son walks about ancient Palestine, to be literally physically sacrificed as a justification for a spiritual pathway to Godliness. God is not the "features of men's faces" -- no, those are sinful people and alien to God. But God lies beyond, and provides a pathway to acheive righteousness. 

There is a sort of literalism here, and it is perhaps the most powerful, though much less clear, when Paul talks about the raising of the dead in 1 Corinthians 15, and tries to make clear that there /is/ a bodily resurrection but that it is /not/ our worldly flesh that will be raised. This is not an enlightenment that seeks selflessness for its own sake; resurrection is explicitly claimed by Paul to /not/ be a morality tale, but something that will literally happen, with valid discussions to be had about what sorts of flesh will inherit the Kingdom and what sorts will not. God is viewed with that /tangibility/ that came with Jesus's human flesh. 

~ Aquinas ~
I cannot pretend to have a perfect overview of all of the Church fathers, or even to be professionally-trained  as a theologian. I have not even read all of the many thousands of pages of Aquinas's /Summa Theologica/, which would be a major accomplishment in itself, dense argumentation as it is. But I want to talk about the Aquinas that I /have/ read, and some of his influences.

In the /Summa Theologica/, Aquinas argues that we have to come to God by our faculties of reason and observation, and thus insists on a strong program of natural theology. Aquinas views scripture as a very important part of this procedure -- that is, some truths about God will only come from revelation and tradition, and not from anything else. But he insists that everyone will indeed see that God exists.

Aquinas wrote in a sort of backwards order from the way that modern English would present an argument; so I wish to present my own retelling of Aquinas' argument. If you wish to read the original, Google up the Summa Theologica and look through the questions there posed. Here's my version of Aquinas's proof of God:

First, we're going to talk about meta-dynamics: what we know about how things change. Well: how do things change? Aquinas identifies three aspects: first, something has a /potential/ property, and then afterwards this becomes an /actual/ property, and this change is /caused/ by something. For example, when I boil water, the water has the /potential/ to be in vapor form, and afterwards it is /actually/ in vapor form, and the heat that I add /causes/ this property to move from being potential to actual. Finally, let's ask about the cause: what can cause this shift from potentiality to actuality? The answer is only, /some other actual thing/ -- you need the real world to shift the hypothetical into the real.  

If we accept this meta-dynamical account, then Aquinas invites us to look out at the world. Out there, we see a whole bunch of actual things -- actual properties and states. Some of them have changed to be there -- but this is fine. Now we begin to /reduce away/ the properties which changed into actualities, identifying their causes, which must be actual things. We thus /regress/ our set of actualities into the past.

This regression could never end, and enter an infinite loop, but this seems implausible for a couple reasons, which we might omit. Once we've discarded the infinite loop, we can also discard the empty set of no causes: the causal regression can simplify the set, but it can't eliminate it. The only other option is a set with a couple actualities that simply /started out actual/ -- they were never potential. And so we see that there must be a set of actual properties which "set the universe in motion". 

This is the final perspective on God: the Unmoved Mover, the set of actualities which gave rise to our contingent, changing world. As seen in Aquinas, it can be discovered by natural theology, and can thus be apprehended by people -- perhaps mostly professionals -- who act within the world we live in. We're asking "why is there something rather than nothing?" -- and God is our answer to this question. 

~ Splitting the Atom ~
With these three ideas put together, I would like to explain the trinity as a real problem, rather than some hypothetical mystical conundrum -- something that occurs within peoples' approaches to God, rather than something which occurs in the dogmas of some holy book. But I wish to begin by asking, "what does the classical Trinity actually mean, anyway?"

Aquinas's take on the trinity might be phrased this way: that the Father represents the creative role of God in the universe, the essence that the universe was created. The Son then represents the Word, or Logos, which proceeds as a sort of intellect: the Son is thought and reasoning and deliberation. The Spirit, then, represents love -- a love which proceeds from both the Father and the Son, but which cannot be contained within them.

We are thus able to see, in Aquinas, Karen Armstrong's distinction between /logos/ and /mythos/ -- and Armstrong's identification of God with mythos means that we can classify the first view -- that God is in the features of men's faces -- as the "Spirit" view. The view of Paul, which seemed so oppositional and so insistent on both the person of Christ and the actual facts of the resurrection, can be identified with the intellect and the word and the logos -- thus, Paul's view is the "Son" view. And Aquinas himself begins from the Father and starts to discuss how the Son proceeds from the Father and the Spirit proceeds from both Father and Son. These three views are our Trinity.

We've not just identified views of God, but /plausible/ views of God -- these statements of divinity all ring true, and there's no ground to dismiss them -- though certainly many theists have tried. Even Islam must reconcile humanity with divinity via the divine, and must account both for creation and for divine immanence.

But, here's the crucial part of this atom-splitting: these three views /cannot/ all be simultaneously true, even in a metaphorical sense. The metaphors claw at each other's throats. The Spirit insists on the importance of non-literalism, a mythos, that totally undermines the Son's literal-minded questions. Where Paul wanted to reconcile God and Man via Christ, Hopkins asserts that Christ -- reconciliation -- is present everywhere, and not just in the person of Jesus. It is hard to maintain that everything is infused with divinity and at the same time that everything is corrupt with sin and alien to the divine. So the Son and the Spirit are at odds.

Meanwhile, the eternal and unchanging edifice of Aquinas' Father is totally corrupted if that same divine essence comes down and participates in the change of the rest of the world -- as the potential Word becomes the actual Word, so perishes the idea that God is the eternal unchanging kernel of our universe. So the Father and the Son are at odds; the divinity does indeed transition from potential to actual within the story of the Son, but not so in the story of the Father. Whereas one set of facts comes to you in the here and now -- literal, factual reconciliation of the person with their deity -- the other comes to you in the distant past -- really just a question of 'why is there anything at all?'

And while the Father has a detached transcendence to him -- "that being which created the world" being a rather remote and theoretical entity -- the Spirit claims to be in every experience, shining through every waking moment in the beauty of the universe. And the Spirit claims to be distinctly human, where the Father is distinctly universal. So the metaphors just don't accept each other.

Thus, we have the true paradox of the Trinity: Christianity wants to say, 'oh, these are all valid ways to think of God,' but our intuitions can't put any two of them together. It is traditionally understood as a subject of /divine mystery/ -- meaning that our human minds are simply not sophisticated enough to say something about the underlying truth of the infinite God, because, well, he's God.

I don't like this answer: because if there's ever a place where a red flag is raised, it's when you have a murky frame of mind that gives you an excuse to be intellectually lazy. Mystery may by itself be good, but it is no replacement for following our deepest convictions about logic and contrary metaphors and the like.

My own solution to the Trinity -- a particular application of atheism -- is, I feel, novel. Suppose we totally abandon the imprecise notion of God, and commit to talking about an objective aesthetic account of the universe. If this aesthetic explains the universe, then we have God the Father wrapped up within this aesthetic. If this aesthetic is objectively realized in the world around us, then we have the Son -- the act of reconciling one's self with the aesthetic in terms of it "coming down" to you in concrete form. And natural indifference to morality becomes the central metaphor of the "fallen and corrupt" humanity -- rather than some rubbish about talking snakes and fruits of moral knowledge.

And, finally, the aesthetic /is/ something more than sounding the bells that live inside of you. It /is/ in the justice of a just woman, or in the smile in a man's eyes. So the Spirit comes into this picture as well. By abandoning the baggage of gods, the truths in each element of the Trinity come together, and become a simpler overall picture. We cease to choose aspects of God because all of the aspects come together, if we don't have to continue with nonsense about "three persons in one godhead" or some such.

Church Fathers vs. St. Paul vs. Karen Armstrong & Hopkins
	Three takes on God
		"God is abstract, transcendental, something beyond everything."
		"God came down as a human, and walked around Palestine."
		"Christ is within you, within smiles; we aren't doing literal histories here." 
	And this is the Trinity /proper/: father, son, holy ghost
	But, they are incompatible. 
		The Spirit's insistence on non-literalism harms the literal Son.
			Paul wanted to reconcile the Father with Man, but the proposed Spirit undermines this whole case.
		The Son's insistence on personification and human realization harms the Father.
		The Father's detached transcendence betrays the Spirit.
	Mystery is good, but you have to rely too much on it.