A poor man, named James, lived and fished upon a large lake, trading his fish in the rainy season for the bread and vegetables that the farmers who lived there grew. James was very shrewd and always got the best of prices, but he was never a very fortunate fisherman, and could barely support his wife Julia.

One year was particularly bad: though everyone prayed and prayed for rain, the rainy season that year was bone-dry. So all of the farmers in all of the countryside came to the lake with wagons full of buckets, and stole much of the water, so much so that the lake shrank to half its size. 

With twice as many fishermen, the competition was incredible, and most days James came home to Julie with nothing. By the dry season, he had nothing to trade to the greedy farmers, and they were both starving on the shrinking, crowded lake.

One day, James was fishing and finally complained out loud. "God has given up on us! For I would give anything I have to have some food." But just that moment, he saw some motion in the water. He was swift with his net, and caught a truly massive black fish, which he pulled up alongside his boat. It was truly a massive specimen -- this he could surely trade for bread enough to live out the season! He exclaimed in joy to celebrate it.

As he readied to pull it up onto his boat, the fish poked his head out of the water and talked to him. The fish said simply, "My master has heard your call. If you take me with you, my master will make you the richest person in these lands, so that you will never starve again."

"What?" James asked. "Why? What does your master want in return?"

"You said you would give anything," said the fish. "And my master will one day come and take that which you love most."

James thought about it a long time, thought about one day losing Julia, his wife. But as of late they had been arguing, and he thought that she was going to leave him for a more successful man anyway, so he finally agreed. He pulled the fish into his boat and paddled in towards the grand market.

Now, every man on the harbor wanted to beat him for the massive fish he had landed, to take it from him. But he ran with the fish in his arms and finally arrived at the market. Before he could step inside, a rich merchant stopped him. "That is truly a massive fish!" he exclaimed. "I would surely pay gold for such a prize."

"Gold?" James exclaimed excitedly. But then he realized who this rich man was: Hades, the devil, the lord of the underworld, Satan. "I am the master of that fish," he said, "and this is your last chance to accept or reject this offer. You may have this wagon full of gold and silk and spices for that fish, but I will come to take that which you love most."

It was the best offer he could possibly imagine -- a cart of valuables for a fish -- and he firmly spoke: "I accept that deal." Hades produced a contract made of gold, and made the man sign it in his own blood. Then Hades was gone, and the man wheeled the horses and the carriage up to his small shack.

The years passed, as he took his small fortune and made a bigger one. He was an incredibly shrewd merchant, and he and Julia moved into the nearest large city, becoming rich beyond their wildest dreams off of the trading that he did. And Julia bore him a beautiful son, who they named Nathan. Nathan was a bright boy who did not cause his parents much fuss; he tended to his duties but dreamed very large dreams. His younger sister Sara was much more of a handful. As Sara turned ten, the two decided to have a final child before Julia turned barren.

While Julia was still pregnant with this last coming child, her kids learned in the finest of schools. Her prayers to God seemed to be answered.

It was one of these days that Nathan noticed a strange merchant man walking down the road of his father's house -- all the more strange because he could have sworn he had seen this man many times around his town. He greeted the man, figuring that this must be a merchant with considerable influence, surely one of his father's friends. The man beckoned to him and they talked, then walked into one of the spaces between houses, but nobody has ever known what was said or done in that alley. 

All that is known is that, days later, the boy furiously started to demand from his father the knowledge of his wealth and birth. His mother sided with the boy: for she was not willing to quarrel with serendipity when she was starving, but now that the question was asked, she wanted to know the full cost of their prosperity. After two days, at dinner, James broke down into tears and told them: some day soon, that which he loved most would be taken from them. 

At that instant, that strange merchant knocked upon the door and interrupted their dinnertime discussion. He withdrew the golden contract signed in James' blood, and said simply, "What you love most is your children, and that is what I have come to take. Even the last child to come shall be brought to the underworld when she is born."

The man begged Hades to take the wealth instead, but the devil was insistent. Julia pounded on James' back, grieving over his callous desperation. Nathan just made a simple request: "Since we only found out about this today, can my mother have a week to mourn our loss?"

"Fine," the devil said. "But after that, you must come with me willingly to the underworld and work for me."

"And my sister, can she have some more years of her childhood to live?" he tentatively bargained.

Hades was grumpy at this, but they worked out an agreement for her to have several months before she, too would come. He went on his way, but Nathan would occasionally see him standing in the streets over the coming week.

Nathan told the priests about his upcoming entrance into the underworld. They recommended that Satan would not like crosses and that demons would be burned by the holy water, and so he asked his neighbors to make clothes with crosses, and a backpack, and a beautiful wine-skin for the holy water. They did not know what any of it was for, but they all agreed, because they knew that he was the nicest of children in the town, and they hoped for favors from his father.

On the day when he was to leave, his father surprised him with his coming-of-age present, which he had always desired to be the finest of daggers made by the finest of the city's weaponsmiths. This one was even more elaborate than the original plan, as his father had asked the goldsmiths to decorate it and jewelers to adorn it: it was a beautiful weapon indeed.

The priests blessed the clothes and the cross-like dagger, and filled the wine-skin with holy water. He packed it all up, ate dinner, and said his last goodbyes to a tearful family. And when Hades came for his first child, he did not stop to search Nathan's backpack, but impatiently led Nathan away, to the gates of hell.

Nathan's first task for the devil was simple: the demons who brought the fuel for the fires of Tartarus were getting restless, and so Hades needed a pure soul to keep them in line, to get the fuel in. Nathan fulfilled his work nobly, directing these massive gangs of demons to log the infinite underworld forests. But Nathan was playing pranks, for he would cut at the ropes to weaken them, and then they would snap, dropping entire crews of these demons on the floor.

As the work slowed, Hades insisted on an explanation as to why his sinners weren't burning in so much hellfire as was normal. "It is the ropes," Nathan said. "They are not strong enough for the trees. We need the strongest of ropes, so strong that even you could not pull them apart. For we have an army of demons pulling on them, and you are the only thing here that is stronger than an army of demons." 

So Hades searched the entire underworld, finally finding a supply of a silver cord so strong that even he could not break them. He brought these to Nathan, who cut them with his holy dagger and knotted them, so that the armies could pull these massive trees for the hellfire. And he cut himself also the finest of belts from the substance, soaking it in holy water to protect it from the hellfires. 

This gave him an idea: he soaked the ropes themselves in holy water, so that they would survive the fires of hell even if they accidentally fell in. But this had an unexpected consequence: it was slowly burning through the hands of the demons who hauled the firewood!

When the devil found out about the holy water burning his demons' hands, he was furious. He ordered Nathan to punishment in the first layer of Tartarus, where demons would slash at your body and face. But Nathan wore his holy clothes, and no demon could approach him so as to hurt him -- though one tried and burned its claw in the attempt.

When the devil then found out that he was obeying the orders without being punished, he was even more incensed. He ordered Nathan into the fires of Tartarus, and personally came to oversee his torment. Nathan screamed and shouted, but it was all an act: he had covered his body with holy water before stepping in the flames, and he was in fact quite cool. Of course, his holy clothes could not burn in the unholy flames either, nor his belt soaked in holy water, and the devil did not dare touch either. 

When Nathan saw that Hades was exhausted from the torment and had fallen asleep in his chair, Nathan cut the chains holding him into the fire with his fine holy dagger, and wrapped his belt tight around Hades, pinning him into his chair. Nathan gagged the devil, fearing that the devil would order him to untie the belt. 

Holding the devil at daggerpoint, he demanded the location of his father's contract. With some pointing and gesturing, the Devil directed him to a bag nearby. Inside, Nathan found many contracts, including his father's. He pierced it with the dagger and held it in the fires that were meant to burn him, letting them burn away his father's bloody signature and melt the gold into the inferno. The deal undone, he then marched out the same way he came in, and returned home to his father and mother.

The celebration was joyous; their second daughter was born, and now all remember the boy who outfoxed the devil. 