My bike mechanic comes from Ghana, and we talk quite a bit whenever my bike is 
in the shop. I mentioned that I like science because I like stories, and he 
gave me two stories:

(1) In Africa, there are all these little birds, and there was a man who gave a
loan to one of them, and she promised, "I'll pay you back when I'm big and 
strong." So the lender waited for it to become big and strong. A month turned
into a year, which turned into two years, which turned into five years. The 
bird wasn't getting any bigger! So the man talked with the animals, asked them
when he might get his money back.

The animals laughed and said, "you ask that bird's father and grandfather, and
then you'll know when you get your money back."

So the lender made friends with the bird, and asked to see its father and 
grandfather. And the bird agreed. 

It was a windy day when they all came. The man finally saw that they were all
the same size and the little bird was full-grown, and he said sadly, "ah, so I
will never get my money, for you will never grow to be big and strong." 

The father-bird suddenly pushed his child off the branch, into a gust of wind
that knocked him off-balance! He spiraled toward the ground, flapping madly, 
but he righted himself and came level, and flew back up to the branch, a little
irritated. The father said, "you see, he is so strong that even the wind cannot
stop him -- he is big and strong enough to pay you back." So the little bird
paid back his loan.

(2) There were a turtle and a bird which became friends and would often check 
in on each other. But when the bird's brothers found out about it, they became 
very critical and negative. When they saw their brother sitting with the 
turtle, they would fly by and say, "why do you spend time with that turtle? He 
is slow, he cannot fly, he cannot do anything, he is useless."

But he still sat with the turtle. He said, "we're friends."

So they said, finally, "You can't be friends. The real test of friendship is,
when your mother dies, your true friends come to her funeral, to be with you in
a time of real trouble and sadness. But he won't be able to come up the tree to
comfort you. Some friend he's gonna be."

In the coming days the bird heard that over and over again. "He can't come when
your mother dies, some friend he's gonna be." But the bird kept visiting the 
turtle. They kept talking and enjoying each other's company.

Well, finally, the sad day came where this actually happened. The bird came to 
the turtle with his brothers, saddened, and said "Yeah, my mother died, I know 
you probably can't travel up the tree to get to the funeral, but it's okay, I 
forgive you." 

The turtle replied, "well, I will do something better. I will tell you a sure 
way to get her into heaven. It is a turtle secret." 

This excited even the bird's brothers, who for once shut their mouths! He 
continued, "If you see that big tree over there, that is the biggest tree in 
this land, with its roots in the ground and its leaves up in heaven. So before 
you celebrate, you fill a big calabash with food and leave it at the base of 
that tree overnight. Then, with morning, you bring it to the funeral, and it 
will pull your mother's spirit with it. Then when the funeral is over, you must
take the calabash and drop it out into the river, so that it flows on a journey
out to sea. And it will surely find heaven and take your mother's spirit with
it."

The bird's brothers were skeptical, but they all agreed that it couldn't hurt
and it was worth a calabash filled with food. So they worked together, to carry
this really big gourd to the Great Tree. It was very big, but it didn't seem so
special to a bird who flies above and around it. But they left the gourd there
overnight anyway.

Overnight, the turtle made his way to the Great Tree and came to the calabash.
He dug a little hole for himself inside of it, hiding inside. So, when the 
birds brought it back to the funeral, they brought the turtle with them. The 
turtle waited until he was alone, climbed out, cleaned himself off, and then 
came around the front -- "Oh, I'm so sorry, this is such a sad day."

The birds said, "okay, that's pretty amazing, that he could climb all this way,
but watch him try to get down. He's doomed. He's useless." But towards the end
of the funeral, as people filtered out of the home, sure enough the turtle 
returned to the calabash and dug himself back in, inside of it. The birds said
farewell to all of their other guests, then saw the calabash and remembered 
that they had one last journey. So, by night, they grabbed the calabash and 
threw it into the river, and watched it begin a journey downstream, out to sea.

What they didn't see in the darkness was the turtle, swimming to safety. 

Some days later, the bird and the turtle were talking again, and the brothers
came by: but they were speechless. They could no longer say anything bad about
how the turtle was useless, or that the turtle was no true friend.